proposal: Lotus dynamic retrieval pricing. (#97)
protocol/web3-dev-team: proposals/lotus-dynamic-retrieval-pricing.md

# Dynamic retrieval pricing in Lotus

Authors: @raulk

Initial PR: https://github.com/protocol/web3-dev-team/pull/97.

## Purpose &amp; impact 
#### Background &amp; intent
_Describe the desired state of the world after this project? Why does that matter?_

A retrieval client asks the miner for a quote before proceeding to retrieve a
piece or a part therein. The miner quotes:

> - minimum price per byte
> - maximum payment interval
> - maximum payment interval increase
> - unseal price

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- unseal price
  The price the client must pay if the miner needs to unseal data
- minimum price per byte
  The price the client must pay for each byte of data
- maximum payment interval
  The number of bytes that the provider will send before pausing the transfer to wait for payment
- maximum payment interval increase
  The increase in the payment interval each time payment is received
```

The quoted values become part of the deal proposal. Unlike with storage deals,
retrieval deal proposals don’t go on chain.	

> All these values are filled from the “stored ask”. The “stored ask” can be
> changed through JSON-RPC, but it’s statically set. Lotus doesn’t have the
> ability to change the quote based on the piece that’s being requested.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the provider side, these values are filled from the “stored ask”. The “stored ask” can be
changed through JSON-RPC, but it’s statically set. Lotus doesn’t have the
ability to change the quote based on the piece that’s being requested.
```

This means that fast retrieval and non-fast retrieval deals get the same
treatment with regards to pricing. In other words, anything that’s set as the
"stored ask" will be a blanket policy for all retrievals, fast or ordinary,
verified or unverified.

Impact of the blanket policy to unsealing price:

> - If the unsealing price is set to zero, the miner commits to serving all deals
>   at zero cost, even those that require unsealing. Unsealing is a heavy and
>   expensive operations, one that's irrational for miners to offer for free.
> - If the unsealing price is set to non-zero, fast retrievals will require the
>   creation of a payment channel, which introduces significant latency and
>   requires chain interaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If the unsealing price is set to zero, the miner commits to serving all deals
  without requiring an unseal payment from the client, even those that require unsealing.
  Unsealing is a heavy and expensive operation, one that's irrational for miners to offer for free.
- If the unsealing price is set to non-zero, retrievals will require the
  creation of a payment channel (even if price per byte is zero),
  which introduces significant latency and requires chain interaction.
```

Impact of the blanket policy to price per byte:
- Miners wanting to provide free retrieval for verified deals would set this

>   value to zero. This has the side-effect of skipping payment channel creation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  value to zero. This has the side-effect of skipping payment channel creation
  (if unseal price is also zero).
```

      pieces at 0 (using the fields above).
    - Via an externally invoked function, so that miners can inject their own
      logic to quote dynamic prices -- similar to deal filter. This requires
      defining a schema and an intermediate data format (likely JSON).

#### What does done look like?
_What specific deliverables should completed to consider this project done?_

Merged pull requests on go-fil-markets and lotus + user documentation.

####  What does success look like?
_Success means impact. How will we know we did the right thing?_

If the goals in the project brief are satisfied, we know we did the right thing.

#### Counterpoints &amp; pre-mortem
_Why might this project be lower impact than expected? How could this project fail to complete, or fail to be successful?_

N/A.

#### Alternatives
_How might this project’s intent be realized in other ways (other than this project proposal)? What other potential solutions can address the same need?_

The pricing function could be hardcoded, but that's too short-sighted.

#### Dependencies/prerequisites
<!--List any other projects that are dependencies/prerequisites for this project that is being pitched.-->

> F3 retrieval stabilisation.

Reviewer: I don't think this is really a pre-requisite - the ongoing stabilization work is for the case where the connection goes down in the middle of a data transfer, but a lot of retrieval deals will likely be made over stable connections.

Author: Agree. I'm going to refine this to say that it's not technically a dependency, but work here needs to be coordinated with F3 as they are touching the same codebases.

being requested.

This means that fast retrieval and non-fast retrieval deals get the same
treatment with regards to pricing. In other words, anything that’s set as the
"stored ask" will be a blanket policy for all retrievals, fast or ordinary,
verified or unverified.

Impact of the blanket policy to unsealing price:
- If the unsealing price is set to zero, the miner commits to serving all deals
  without requiring an unseal payment from the client, even those that require
  unsealing. Unsealing is a heavy and expensive operation, one that's irrational
  for miners to offer for free today.
- If the unsealing price is set to non-zero, fast retrievals will require the
  creation of a payment channel (even if price per byte is zero), which
  introduces significant latency and requires chain interaction.

Impact of the blanket policy to price per byte:
- Miners wanting to provide free retrieval for verified deals would set this
  value to zero. This has the side-effect of skipping payment channel creation 
  (if unseal price is also zero).
- However, that same policy would apply to unverified deals, which the miner is

>   likely not keen to offer for free.

Reviewer 2: Hm... this seems incongruent with what the goldenpath around retrieval seems to be?  That is: mining is so profitable that we do expect  in the short to medium term (multiple year) that miners will be offering free retrieval provided Fil+ is in place. Also dealbot efforts are centered around making unsealing untenable, by effectively requiring everything to be stored twice ( again - miners will go with it because it is cheaper to store anyway ).

Did thinking really shift that much since mid-march?

Author: The goal hasn't changed. This line says that, currently, setting the retrieval price to byte to zero affects all storage deals, both verified AND unverified. That's one of the things we need to make dynamic.

Reviewer 2: I should have done a more precise highlight. Let me clarify:

- On unsealing: my understanding is that there is broad agreement ( including from CE ) that the act of unsealing is uneconomical given the current proofs system, and thus the option ought to be deprioritized if not deprecated within the "happy path". That is - miner always stores both sectors ( which is currently switched to be the default ) and if they do elect to delete some of the unsealed replicas, it is on them to pay the price for recovery. Additionally the dealbots ranking of TTFB will further make not providing fast retrieval untenable. Thus it seems odd at present expending effort and API-surface on making unsealing more visible.

- My other point was on how free and non-free retrieval are listed as equal options in the highlighted text, whereas it would be prudent to "nudge" both miner and client API users / implementors to gravitate towards "free by default, and not doing so is somewhat of a chore". In the spirit of "defaults matter" etc.

Bedrock golden path), as well as provide an external script that receives the
decision factors wrapped in a structured message, and returns the pricing
decisions. This could be similar to the existing deal filter mechanism.

#### Impact
_How would this directly contribute to web3 dev stack product-market fit?_

It's essential.

#### Internal leverage
_How much would nailing this project improve our knowledge and ability to execute future projects?_

Low. This is a chore, not a novelty seeking nor risky project.

#### Confidence
_How sure are we that this impact would be realized? Label from [this scale](https://medium.com/@nimay/inside-product-introduction-to-feature-priority-using-ice-impact-confidence-ease-and-gist-5180434e5b15)_.

10. This solves an existing shortcoming in our technology that we have "launch
data" for.

## Project definition

![Solution sketch](./sketches/dynamic-retrieval-pricing.png)

#### Brief plan of attack

1. Introduce the ability to query the unsealing status of a piece from the
   storage subsystem (unseal_status).
2. Introduce the ability to query whether the storage deal was a verified deal
   (verified_deal).

> 3. Introduce the ability to query whether the storage deal had fast retrieval

Reviewer 3: @hannahhoward 

IIUC, retrieval market creates dealIDs by using a counter. dealID is not a key that's shared between the storage & retrieval markets. 

During quoting a deal, the retrieval market does have access to the payloadCid and I am thinking of using that as a key to fetch the storage deal params we need for pricing. Would you know of a Lotus API that can help return the storage deal params given a payloadCid ?

The other solution I'm thinking of is injecting a storage market lookup function in the retreival markets that looks-up storage deals based on their payloadCid.

> 3. Introduce the ability to query whether the storage deal had fast retrieval

Reviewer 3: @hannahhoward Ah, nvm. I think you mean the on chain dealID that the retrieval market can access using the PieceInfo. I see that Lotus has APIs to return storage params using the on chain dealID. This should be doable.

> 3. Introduce the ability to query whether the storage deal had fast retrieval

Reviewer 4: @aarshkshah1992 yes your second comment is correct. I am referring to the on chain DealID. Eek terminology overloading!
